WiP: rework migrate to XCP-ng documentation (#346)
xcp-ng/xcp-ng-org: docs/installation/migrate-to-xcp-ng.md

This documentation will help you to make a migration to XCP-ng, from any most common other virtualization platform (VMware, KVM, etc.)

## 📋 Prerequisites

Before migrating your VMs, make sure to check the following:

> ### Uninstall Existing Guest Tools

Reviewer: How about we organize the three prerequisites into a bullet list (or a numbered list, if the order is important)?

> ### Uninstall Existing Guest Tools

Reviewer: Perhaps we could organize the three prerequisites into a bullet list (or an numbered list, if the order is important), but subsections are fine too

Reviewer: Nah, it's ok!

> To avoid conflicts with XCP-ng guest tools, uninstall any existing VM tools (such as VMware Tools or QEMU Guest Agent) from the VM.

Reviewer 2: Example command lines will not hurt (at least for common OSes)

### Install Xen Drivers

On some systems (especially RHEL-based and SLES distributions) Xen drivers are not installed by default. Migrating a VM without these drivers can prevent the OS from detecting disks and network interfaces.

Before shutting down the VM, run this command to install the drivers:

```

> dracut --add-drivers "xen-blkfront xen-netfront" --force

Reviewer 2: Is force really needed ? we could try without first eg:

```
dracut --add-drivers "xen-blkfront xen-netfront" \
|| dracut --add-drivers "xen-blkfront xen-netfront" --force
```

If you lost ability to extend migrated volume (opening journal failed: -2) You need to move disk to another storage, VM should be ON during moving process. This issue can occur when vhd files was directly copied to storage folder.
:::

> ## 🇰 From KVM (Libvirt, Proxmox and other)

Reviewer: others with an S, maybe?

> First, shut down the virtual machine. If you don’t already have the `qemu-img` command available, you can install it by installing the `qemu-utils` package on your computer or server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, shut down the virtual machine. If you the `qemu-img` command is not available yet, you can install it as part of the the `qemu-utils` package on your computer or server.
```

> Next, convert the QCOW2 disk to a VHD format using the following command:

Reviewer: 'Using X/Y/etc.' can get repetitive and tedious to read, but we can find some workarounds:

```suggestion
Next, run this command to convert the QCOW2 disk to a VHD format:
```

```
qemu-img convert -O vpc disk.qcow2 `uuidgen`.vhd
```

Then [import your VHD](../../installation/migrate-to-xcp-ng/#import-the-vhd)

## 🔄 Alternatives 

### OVA

You can also export an OVA from your hypervisor (VirtualBox, VMWare...) and import an OVA into Xen Orchestra.

An OVA is a big, single file using the standard Open Virtualization Format. The OVA contains an XML describing the metadata (VM name, description, etc.) and your disks in the VMDK format.

:::tip

> To skip Windows activation if the system was already activated, collect info about the network cards used in the Windows VM (ipconfig /all) and use the same MAC address(es) when creating interfaces in XCP-ng.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To skip Windows activation in case system is already activated, collect information on the network cards used in the Windows VM (ipconfig /all) and use the same MAC address(es) when creating interfaces in XCP-ng.
```

:::

![](../assets/img/import-ova.png)

:::warning

> - **Downtime**: The OVA can only be exported while the VM is off (except if you export a clone, but all blocks written after the clone won't be on the imported VM. If you can sync after, it's fine!). This can take a while, and your VMs won't be reachable until it's fully exported AND imported on destination.

Reviewer: Parentheses are useful for small amounts of information. If the phrase enclosed in parentheses is long, then perhaps it should be an entire sentence.

```suggestion
- **Downtime**: The OVA can only be exported while the VM is off, except if you export a clone. However, all blocks written after the clone won't be on the imported VM. If you can sync after, it's fine!\
This can take a while, and your VMs won't be reachable until it's fully exported AND imported on destination.
```

1. Insert a CloneZilla live CD in your existing VM, and boot on it. In the meantime, you also have a VM on the destination with the right metadata (same name and disks), which you'll also boot with CloneZilla.

2. From the VM console, you can tell the source VM running CloneZilla to send all the blocks to the destination VM, also running CloneZilla. 

3. As soon it's done, you can safely shut down the original VM and boot the copy on destination!

:::warning
- **Downtime**: Even if the downtime will be reduced compared to using OVA, you still need to run the export/import process while the VM is off.
- **Setup time**: Not complex, but various operations are needed until you can start the replication for one VM. If you have a lot of VMs, this can take some effort.
:::

## 📥 Import the VHD 

### With Xen Orchestra

In the left menu, go for "Import" then "Disk". Select the destination SR, and then add your VHD file into it. Depending on the VHD file size, it might take some time. The upload progress can be tracked in another XO tab, in the "Task" menu.

![](../assets/img/import-disk.png)

When the disk is imported, you can:

> -  Create a VM with the appropriate template, **without any disk in it**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a VM with the appropriate template, **without any disk in it**
```

- Attach the previously imported disk (VM/Disk/Attach an existing disk)
- Boot the VM
- Install the tools

### Via the CLI

You can transfer the VHD file directly to your XCP-ng storage repository (SR) using SCP:

```
scp thegenerateduuid.vhd ip.xcp-ng.server:/run/sr-mount/uuid-of-your-SR
```

:::warning

> The name of your VHD MUST BE an uuid (e.g. 44ad36fc-e9f1-4d74-9090-2d9bffddbee2.vhd).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of your VHD MUST BE a uuid (e.g. 44ad36fc-e9f1-4d74-9090-2d9bffddbee2.vhd).
```

You can generate one with the command `uuidgen` on Linux.
:::

You need to rescan the SR where you new VHD file is, so it can be detected. It will appear in the disk list, without a name or description though. You can use `xe sr-scan` or use the scan button on the storage in Xen Orchestra.

In Xen Orchestra, create a new VM without a disk, and make sure to uncheck the "Boot VM after creation" option under advanced settings. Then, go to the "Disks" tab, click on "Attach disk", select the VHD you just uploaded, and attach it.

## 🛠️ Troubleshooting

### My imported VM is not booting 

> - Check if the Boot firmware (in advanced setting) is on the correct type (BIOS or UEFI)

Reviewer: If the bullet list items are complete sentences, we can end them with a full stop.

```suggestion
- Check if the Boot firmware (in advanced setting) is on the correct type (BIOS or UEFI).
```

- Check if the boot disk is the first in the VM disk tab
- Check [here](../../installation/migrate-to-xcp-ng/#error-dracut-initqueue227-warning-devmapperol-root-does-not-exist-or-no-bootable-device)

### Error "dracut-initqueue[227]: Warning: /dev/mapper/ol-root does not exist" (or no bootable device)

This error means Xen driver are not present in the kernel (see [here](../../installation/migrate-to-xcp-ng/#install-xen-drivers))

You can boot an live CD, and mount root and boot partition
```
mount <root device> /mnt/
mount <boot device> /mnt/boot/

for x in sys proc run dev tmp; do mount --bind /$x /mnt/$x; done
```
Check your fstab to see the exact layout of your partition !
If you have LVM partition, you can enable them with `vgchange -ay`

Chroot in your mounted partition 
```
chroot /mnt
```
Find your initrd files (if you have several file, use the more recent version), usualy in /boot or /boot/efi
Then add the xen drivers:
```
dracut --kver <version> -f /boot/initrd<version> --add-drivers "xen-blkfront xen-netfront" --force
```
Exit the chroot, unmount all your partition, and you can reboot, or detach the disk if you used your XO

> You VM should be booting now !

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You VM should be booting now!
```

If you lost ability to extend migrated volume (opening journal failed: -2) You need to move disk to another storage, VM should be ON during moving process. This issue can occur when vhd files was directly copied to storage folder.
:::

## 🇰 From KVM (Libvirt, Proxmox and others)

First, shut down the virtual machine. If the `qemu-img` command is not available, you can install it as part of the the `qemu-utils` package on your computer or server.

Next, run this command to convert the QCOW2 disk to a VHD format:

```

> qemu-img convert -O vpc disk.qcow2 `uuidgen`.vhd

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
qemu-img convert -p -O vpc disk.qcow2 `uuidgen`.vhd
```

This will show progress to user

```

Then [import your VHD](../../installation/migrate-to-xcp-ng/#import-the-vhd)

## 🔄 Alternatives 

### OVA

You can also export an OVA from your hypervisor (VirtualBox, VMWare...) and import an OVA into Xen Orchestra.

An OVA is a big, single file using the standard Open Virtualization Format. The OVA contains an XML describing the metadata (VM name, description, etc.) and your disks in the VMDK format.

:::tip

> To skip Windows activation in case system is already activated, collect information on the network cards used in the Windows VM (ipconfig /all) and use the same MAC address(es) when creating interfaces in XCP-ng.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To skip Windows activation in case the system is already activated, collect information on the network cards used in the Windows VM (ipconfig /all) and use the same MAC address(es) when creating interfaces in XCP-ng.
```

:::

![](../assets/img/import-ova.png)

:::warning

> - **Downtime**: The OVA can only be exported while the VM is off, except if you export a clone. However, all blocks written after the clone won't be on the imported VM. If you can sync after, it's fine!). This can take a while, and your VMs won't be reachable until it's fully exported AND imported on destination.

Reviewer: There's a closing parenthesis after 'it's fine!' but no opening one

- **Storage**: You need an intermediary storage where you can export then import the OVA file. If your VMs are small, it's OK.
- **Manual process**: Even if it's simple to do, it can be cumbersome if you have a lot of VMs to migrate.
:::

:::note

> OVA import method will miss the information if the VM is running BIOS or UEFI mode. Double check your settings on your original system, and then enable (or not) UEFI on XCP-ng side for the destination VM. You can do so in VM advanced tab in Xen Orchestra.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OVA import method will miss the information if the VM is running in BIOS or UEFI mode. Double check your settings on your original system, then enable (or not) UEFI on XCP-ng side for the destination VM. You can do so in the VM's Advanced tab in Xen Orchestra.
```

Author: The first sentence is weird. I'll rewrite it

:::

### CloneZilla

Clonezilla is a free and open-source disk imaging and cloning tool used for system backups, recovery, and deployment.

1. Insert a CloneZilla live CD in your existing VM, and boot on it. In the meantime, you also have a VM on the destination with the right metadata (same name and disks), which you'll also boot with CloneZilla.

2. From the VM console, you can tell the source VM running CloneZilla to send all the blocks to the destination VM, also running CloneZilla. 

> 3. As soon it's done, you can safely shut down the original VM and boot the copy on destination!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Once done, you can safely shut down the original VM and boot the copy on destination!
```

:::warning
- **Downtime**: Even if the downtime will be reduced compared to using OVA, you still need to run the export/import process while the VM is off.
- **Setup time**: Not complex, but various operations are needed until you can start the replication for one VM. If you have a lot of VMs, this can take some effort.
:::

## 📥 Import the VHD 

### With Xen Orchestra

In the left menu, go for **Import** then **Disk**. Select the destination SR, and then add your VHD file into it. Depending on the VHD file size, it might take some time. The upload progress can be tracked in another XO tab, in the **Task** menu.

![](../assets/img/import-disk.png)

When the disk is imported, you can:

- Create a VM with the appropriate template, **without any disk in it**
- Attach the previously imported disk (VM/Disk/Attach an existing disk)
- Boot the VM
- Install the tools

### Via the CLI

You can transfer the VHD file directly to your XCP-ng storage repository (SR) using SCP:

```
scp thegenerateduuid.vhd ip.xcp-ng.server:/run/sr-mount/uuid-of-your-SR
```

:::warning

> The name of your VHD MUST BE a uuid (e.g. `44ad36fc-e9f1-4d74-9090-2d9bffddbee2.vhd`).

Reviewer 3: Without the typo

```suggestion
The name of your VHD **must be** a uuid (e.g. `44ad36fc-e9f1-4d74-9090-2d9bffddbee2.vhd`).
```

You can generate one with the command `uuidgen` on Linux.
:::

You need to rescan the SR where you new VHD file is, so it can be detected. It will appear in the disk list, without a name or description though. You can use `xe sr-scan` or use the scan button on the storage in Xen Orchestra.

In Xen Orchestra:
1. Create a new VM without a disk. Go to **Advanced settings** and uncheck the option called **Boot VM after creation** under **Advanced settings**. 
2. Go to the **Disks** tab
3. Click **Attach disk**.
4. Select the VHD you just uploaded, and attach it.

## 🛠️ Troubleshooting

### My imported VM is not booting 

- Check if the Boot firmware (in advanced setting) is on the correct type (BIOS or UEFI).
- Check if the boot disk is the first in the VM disk tab
- Check [here](../../installation/migrate-to-xcp-ng/#error-dracut-initqueue227-warning-devmapperol-root-does-not-exist-or-no-bootable-device)

### Error "dracut-initqueue[227]: Warning: /dev/mapper/ol-root does not exist" (or no bootable device)

This error means Xen driver are not present in the kernel (see [here](../../installation/migrate-to-xcp-ng/#install-xen-drivers))

> You can boot a live CD, and mount root and boot partition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can boot a live CD and mount the `root` and `boot` partitions.
```

```
mount <root device> /mnt/
mount <boot device> /mnt/boot/

for x in sys proc run dev tmp; do mount --bind /$x /mnt/$x; done
```

> Check your fstab to see the exact layout of your partition!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check your /etc/fstab to see the exact layout of your partition!
```

> If you have LVM partition, you can enable them with `vgchange -ay`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have an LVM partition, you can enable them with `vgchange -ay`
```
